{"content": "Hi, this is a quick Blue Jay introduction. I want to show you a couple of things that might be unusual for some of you who have not worked with Blue Jay before or not for too long. If you've been working with eclipse and idea and similar tools, there's a couple of things that are really different here. First, let me open a class. So, let's open animal class here. It's just a class that comes with the textbook example. And I want to show you one particular thing and this is about how you instantiate objects. If you want to create an object of a class in almost all environments, for example, in eclipse or similar, you have to write a main method and then you have to put your instantiation code into the main method and you execute the main method. We do this completely differently in Blue Jay. Blue Jay has this object bench where you can interactively instantiate objects and interact with them. Let me show you how that works. This is the compile button for this class. If I click on it, these two animal classes in the middle of the screen, the cat class has been compiled successfully, so no syntax errors, everything is fine. What I can do now is I can instantiate animal objects even though there is no main method specified here. The program does not have a main method. What Blue Jay does, it uses the methods of the class as if they were Main methods to interact with. So, animal objects can only be created once the class file has been successfully compiled. So, let me open the cat class and as you can see, once it's opened, the cat's class and the animal class both get a zebra crosshatch pattern shown over the class icon and a class cannot be instantiated if it has this icon on it. So, let me first compile these and you see the color changes to a solid yellow. That means they are now ready to be instantiated. If I want to instantiate a cat, I simply right-click on the cat class icon and I get a menu and one of the options at the top is new cat, which is the constructor for the cat. Let me click on this, it opens a window pop-up, asking for a name for the cat. So, let's call her Mitten, and I click OK. And now you see a red icon appearing down here. This is an object of type cat and its name is Mitten. So, if I right-click on Mitten, I can now see a menu of all public methods that are in the cat class that I can call on this object. And this is how we interact with objects in Blue Jay. Now, let me do the same for and you can have multiple objects here as well, by the way. I can call and I can interact with these all here. I can call their methods, I can inspect them and so on. Let me instantiate an animal as well. The animal has two constructors. One takes an end and a string. The other one takes only an end. So let me create an animal without a name. Let's make an animal with age 10. There's no name specified here. The name would be created automatically there. If I open, you'll see this object here without an explicit name. So, you can see these are all very helpful for interacting. Now, let's just inspect what's inside the animal. When I right-click the animal, the first option is inspect. This will give me an inspector window where I can see the states of the variables of this object. And you can see this animal had the name unknown which was set by the constructor because I didn't specify a name there and the age is 10. Okay, so this is about the difference in how we interact with objects directly from the Blue Jay environment from the main interface rather than writing a main method for execution. You can do that too, but we just don't do it a lot of the times. You can also right click and you can save the object. You can move the objects around. You can remove them. You can terminate them. Another thing I wanted to show you was about how we interact with the class hierarchy. So again, I'm using an example from the textbook where we have an animal and a cat class and a dog class. You can open any of these classes. I can see the inheritance structure from these arrows. So, the cat is a subclass of animal. The dog is a subclass of animal and I can right-click on this. There is a new tool. It's called, if I go to inspect, you'll see this. You see a class hierarchy window here that is now available from Blue Jay version 5. So, I click on the class hierarchy and it shows you a window and in this window you can see the relationship between classes. You can expand it to see the entire class hierarchy for your project. This is very helpful when you're dealing with larger projects that have inheritance. And finally, I wanted to show you another tool and this is about the use of the Blue Jay debugger. The Blue Jay debugger is not very obvious, you know, when you just get started with Blue Jay or when you're just using it because it doesn't give you a specific option for the debug. So, let me open the cat class. I've already opened it, but I'll close it and open it again. There is the debug section of the menu. And if you go in that, you'll see a button for show debug window. This will open the debugger window. I can also do this for any of the cat methods, by the way, not only from the class. If I right click the method on the class here, you will see a breakpoint, which is one of the ways to activate the debugger for that method. So, let me open that and let me show you the debugger in action. So, let me create a cat object Mitten. Let me click on this. I'm just gonna leave the cat without a name. And I'm gonna close this now. So, here's my Mitten right here, and I'm gonna right-click on it, and I'm going to set a breakpoint in the cat's make noise method. To set a breakpoint, you open the cat's source code, and then you just click on the gray bar on the side of the text between the line numbers and the code. For example, if I wanted to set it at line 14, I just click here and you can see a red stop sign icon appear. So, the next time I run this method, it should go into debug mode and show me the output in the debug window. So, let me close this now. The debug window is still available to open here at any time. Let me right-click on my Mitten cat object, and I'm going to make the cat make a noise. As you can see, when I clicked on Make noise, I got brought into the debugger interface and I can see the call stack of the program on the left hand side. I can see a bunch of methods here, for example, the make noise method, which is the one that's currently executing. And on the right hand side here, I can see all the local variables and their values and I can step through the whole program line by line by clicking on the step button right here. So, if I click step, it will go to the next line. If it goes to a method, it will go inside the method body. If it's a field declaration, it'll just skip to the next line. You can go to step into, for example, which is very similar to step without actually executing. You can go to step out which will jump out of the current method call if you're inside one. And resume continues execution of the program until the next breakpoint. Let me click on resume. The program has finished executing. If I click clear in the debugger, all the information shown in the screen will be removed. So that is it for this video. Feel free to come to the lab sessions or the workshops if you have any questions.", "metadata": {"url": "https://keats.kcl.ac.uk/mod/kalvidres/view.php?id=9155107", "timestamp": 1763221946745, "chunk_id": "chunk_1763221946720.txt"}}